contrib/k8s.io/gateway-api: Request mirror deployment (#3486)
DataDog/dd-trace-go: contrib/k8s.io/gateway-api/README.md

# Appsec Gateway API Request Mirror

This document provides a detailed guide for implementing the **Datadog AppSec Gateway API Request Mirror** feature using
the `RequestMirror` functionality of Kubernetes Gateway APIs and Datadog's `dd-trace-go`. The goal is to mirror incoming
HTTP requests to a secondary endpoint for security analysis without affecting the primary request flow.

## Overview

The **Datadog AppSec Gateway API Request Mirror** is designed to enhance application security by mirroring incoming HTTP
requests to a Datadog Application Security Monitoring (ASM) endpoint. This allows real-time detection and analysis of
potential application-level attacks, such as:

- Cross-Site Scripting (XSS)
- SQL Injection (SQLi)
- Server-Side Request Forgery (SSRF)

This feature leverages the **RequestMirror** functionality in Kubernetes Gateway APIs to duplicate traffic to a
secondary server where Datadog's request mirror deployment processes the requests.

## Prerequisites

> - Kubernetes cluster with Gateway API CRDs installed (can be
>   done [here](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/#installing-gateway-api)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A Kubernetes cluster with Gateway API CRDs installed (instructions can be
  found [here](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/#installing-gateway-api)).
```

- A controller compatible with the Gateway API (list of supported controllers can be
  found [here](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/implementations)).

## Installation

1. [Deploy the Datadog agent in your Kubernetes cluster](https://docs.datadoghq.com/containers/kubernetes/installation/)

> 2. [Configure the Datadog agent to support incoming Appsec payloads](https://docs.datadoghq.com/tracing/guide/setting_up_apm_with_kubernetes_service/)

Reviewer: Probably will confuse folks that the link says "support incoming Appsec payloads" (the capitalization of "Appsec" is also off), but the page is about setting up APM?

Author: Do you have suggestion for this? I know it can be confusing but I have no really good way to explain it

Reviewer: How about "Set up APM with your Kubernetes service, as this is used as a transport for AppSec payloads"?

3. Deploy the Appsec Gateway API Request Mirror in the namespace of your choice (e.g., `datadog`) along with its
   service:

  ```bash
  kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/DataDog/dd-trace-go/main/contrib/k8s.io/gateway-api/cmd/request-mirror/deployment.yaml
  ```

4. Verify the deployment:

  ```bash
  kubectl get pods -l app=request-mirror

>   ```

Reviewer: That should mention how you'd know the deployment is healthy? Or is that obvious to any half-competent K8s user (I'm not one of them)?

Author: Yes the wording and the "verify" part of any tutorial for deploying stuff is very standard

5. Add the label `aap.datadoghq.com/request-mirror=true` to the namespace containing the above deployment. This will be
   used to identify the namespace where the request mirror is running and let `Gateway` resources access it.

  ```bash
  kubectl label namespace <your-namespace> aap.datadoghq.com/request-mirror=true

>   ```

Reviewer: Could we explicitly provide the namespace to all previous commands? Then you could make it be:

1. Choose which namespace you want the agent deployed to `export DD_AGENT_K8S_NS=datadog`
1. ...
1. `kubectl label namespace "${DD_AGENT_K8S_NS}" aap.datadoghq.com/request-mirror=true`
1. ...

Author: IMO namespace is something that needs to be left to the user. LMK what you think of this change so it's easier for the user.

Replace `<your-namespace>` with the name of your namespace.

> 6. Patch your `Gateway` resources allow access to the namespace with the deployment (use `-help` flag for options).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Patch your `Gateway` resources to allow access to the namespace with the deployment (use `-help` flag for options).
```

```suggestion
6. Patch your `Gateway` resources so they allow access to the namespace with the deployment (use `-help` flag for options).
```

  ```bash
  go run github.com/DataDog/dd-trace-go/contrib/k8s.io/gateway-api/cmd/patch-gateways@latest

>   ```

Reviewer: I guess the prerequisites never mentioned needing to have `go` installed...

Author: Fixed this

7. Patch your `HTTPRoute` resources to redirect traffic to the service (use `-help` flag for options).

  ```bash
  go run github.com/DataDog/dd-trace-go/contrib/k8s.io/gateway-api/cmd/patch-httproutes@latest

>   ```

Reviewer: Same as with the previous "patch blah blah" item... It's unclear to me whether this is a "do once and forget about it forever" thing to do, or whether I have to do it again every time I update my deployment? (I.e -- do I need to add this to my service's CI/CD?)

Author: Added a sentence about this

## Deployment Configuration

The following environment variables are used to configure the Datadog AppSec Gateway API Request Mirror:

| Environment Variable                 | Default Value | Description                                                                                                                |
|--------------------------------------|---------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `DD_REQUEST_MIRROR_LISTEN_ADDR`      | `:8080`       | Value passed in to [net/http.ListenAndServe](https://pkg.go.dev/net/http#ListenAndServe) to receive requests               |
| `DD_REQUEST_MIRROR_HEALTHCHECK_ADDR` | `:8081`       | Value passed in to [net/http.ListenAndServe](https://pkg.go.dev/net/http#ListenAndServe) to listen to healthcheck requests |

By default, the request mirror traces won't show up on Datadog's APM UI. It can be enabled using the env var

> `DD_APM_TRACING_ENABLED=true`

Reviewer: This should be more clear about which deployment/pod needs these configured...

And also, we should hint at consequences of enabling `DD_APM_TRACING_ENABLED` (billing?)

Author: I changed the wording so it talks about APM product instead of APM UI. Is this enough?
